CHAPTER XXIV.
After many days, when time sufficed for the people to arrange their thoughts in reference
to the foregoing scene, there was more than one account of what had been witnessed on the scaffold.
Most of the spectators testified to having seen, on the breast of the unhappy minister,
a scarlet letter, the very semblance of that worn by Hester Brynn, imprinted in the flesh,
as regarded its origin. There were various explanations, all of which must necessarily
have been conjectural. Some affirm that the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, on the very day when
Hester Brynn first wore her ignominious badge, had begun a course of penance, which he afterwards,
in so many futile methods, followed out by inflicting a hideous torture on himself.
Others contended that the stigma had not been produced until a long time subsequent,
when old Roger Chillingworth, being a potent necromancer, had caused it to appear through
the agency of magic and poisonous drugs. Others, again, and those best able to appreciate the
minister's peculiar sensibility and the wonderful operation of his spirit upon the body, whispered
their belief that the awful symbol was the effect of the ever-active tooth of remorse,
gnawing from the inmost heart outwardly, and at last manifesting heaven's dreadful judgment
by the visible presence of the letter. The reader may choose among these theories.
We have thrown all the light we could acquire upon the portent and would gladly, now that it
has done its office, erase its deep print out of our own brain. Where long meditation has fixed it
very undesirable distinctness, it is singular nevertheless that certain persons who were
spectators of the whole scene and professed never once to have removed their eyes from the Reverend
Mr. Dimmesdale, denied that there was any mark whatever on his breast more than on a newborn
infant's, neither by their report had his dying words acknowledged nor even remotely implied any,
the slightest connection on his part with the guilt for which Hester Prynne had so long worn
the scarlet letter. According to these highly respectable witnesses, the minister, conscious
that he was dying, conscious also that the reverence of the multitude placed him already
among saints and angels, had desired by yielding up his breath in the arms of that fallen woman
to express to the world how utterly new Katori is the choicest of man's own righteousness.
After exhausting life in his efforts for mankind's spiritual good, he had made the manner of his
death a parable in order to impress on his admirers the mighty and mournful lesson that,
in the view of infinite purity, we all sinners all alike, it was to teach them that the holiest
amongst us has but attained so far above his fellows as to discern more clearly the mercy
which looks down and repudiate more utterly the phantom of human merit which would look
aspiringly upward. Without disputing a truth so momentous, we must be allowed to consider
this version of Mr. Dimmesdale's story as only an instance of that stubborn fidelity with which
man's friends, and especially a clergyman's, will sometimes uphold his character when proofs
clear as the midday sunshine on the scarlet letter establish him a false and sin-stained creature
of the dust. The authority which we have chiefly followed, a manuscript of old date drawn up from
the verbal testimony of individuals, some of whom had known as Duprin, while others had heard the
from contemporary witnesses, fully confirms the view taken in the foregoing pages. Among many
morals which press upon us from the poor minister's miserable experience, we put only this into a
sentence. Be true, be true, be true. Show freely to the world, if not your worst, yet some trait
whereby the worst may be inferred. Nothing was more remarkable than the change which took place
almost immediately after Mr. Dimmesdale's death in the appearance and demeanor of the old man
known as Roger Chillingworth. All his strength and energy, all his vital and intellectual force
seemed at once to desert him in so much that he positively withered up, shriveled away and
almost vanished from mortal sight like an uprooted weed that lies wilting in the sun. This unabby
man had made the very principle of his life to consist in the pursuit and systematic exercise
of revenge. And when, by its completest triumph, consummation, that evil principle was left with no
further material to support it, when, in short, there was no more devil's work on earth for him
to do, it only remained for the unhumanized mortal to but take himself, whether his master would find
him task enough and pay him his wages duly. But to all these shadowy beings so long our
near acquaintances, as well Roger Chillingworth as his companions, we would fain be merciful.
It is a curious subject of observation and inquiry whether hatred and love be not the same thing at
bottom. Each, in its utmost development, supposes a high degree of intimacy and heart knowledge.
Each renders one individual dependent for the food of his affections and spiritual life upon
another. Each leaves the passionate lover or the no less passionate hater forlorn and desolate by
the withdrawal of his subject philosophically considered. Therefore the two passions seem
essentially the same, except that one happens to be seen in a celestial radiance and the other
in a dusky and lowered glow. In the spiritual world, the old physician and the minister,
mutual victims as they have been, may unawares have found their earthly stalk of hatred and
antipathy transmuted into gold and love. Leaving this discussion apart, we have a matter of business
to communicate to the reader that old Roger Chillingworth's decease, which took place within
the year, and by his last will and testament of which Governor Bellingham and the Reverend
Mr. Wilson were executors, he bequeathed a very considerable amount of property,
both here and in England, to little Burl, the daughter of Esther Brinn. So Burl, the elf child,
the demon offspring, as some people up to that epoch persisted in considering her,
became the richest heiress of her day in the New World. Not improbably, this circumstance brought
very material change in the public estimation, and had the mother and child remained here.
Little Burl, at a marriageable period of life, might have mingled her wild blood with the lineage
of the devoutest Puritan among them all, but no time after the physician's death, the wearer of
the scarlet letter disappeared, and Burl along with her. For many years, though a vague report,
would now and then find its way across the sea, like a shapeless piece of driftwood tossed ashore
with the initials of a name upon it, yet no tidings of them unquestionably authentic were
received. The story of the scarlet letter grew into a legend. Its spell, however, was still potent,
and kept the scaffold awful where the poor minister had died, and likewise the cottage by the seashore
where Esther Brann had dwelt. Near this latter spot, one afternoon, some children were at play,
when they beheld a tall woman in a gray robe approach the cottage door. In all those years,
it had never once been opened, but either she unlocked it, or the decaying wooden iron yielded
to her hand, or she glided shadow-like through these impediments, and at all events went in.
On the threshold she paused, turning partly round, for perchance the idea of entering alone
and all so changed, the home of so intense a former life, was more dreary and desolate
than even she could bear, but her hesitation was only for an instant, though long enough to display
a scarlet letter on her breast. And Esther Brann had returned and taken up her long forsaken shame,
but where was little Pearl? If still alive, she must now have been in the flush and bloom
of early womanhood. None knew, nor ever learned, with the fullness of perfect certainty,
whether the elf-child had gone thus untimely to a maiden grave, or whether her wild, rich nature
had been softened and subdued and made capable of a woman's gentle happiness.
But through the remainder of Esther's life, there were indications that the recluse of the scarlet
letter was the object of love and interest with some inhabitant of another land. Letters came
with armorial seals upon them, though of bearings unknown to English heraldry. In the cottage there
were articles of comfort and luxuries such as Esther never cared to use, but which only wealth
could have purchased and affection have imagined for her. There were trifles, too, little ornaments,
beautiful tokens of a continual remembrance that must have been wrought by delicate fingers
at the impulse of a fond heart. And once, Esther was seen embroidering a baby garment
with such a lavish richness of golden fancy as would have raised a public tumult at any
infant thus apparel had been shown to our sober-youthed community. In fine, the gossips
of that day believed, and Mr. Surveyor Pugh, who made investigations a century later,
believed, and one of his recent successors in office, moreover, faithfully believes,
that Pearl was not only alive but married and happy and mindful of her mother, and that she
would most joyfully have entertained that sad and lonely mother at her fireside. But there was a
more real life for Esther brainier in New England than in that unknown region where Pearl had found
her home. Here had been her sin, here her sorrow and here was yet to be her penitence.
She had returned, therefore, and resumed of her own free will, for not the sternest magistrate
of that iron period would have imposed it, resumed the symbol of which we have related so dark a tale.
Never afterwards did it quit her bosom, but in the lapse of the toilsome, thoughtful and
self-devoted years that made up Hester's life, the scarlet letter ceased to be a stigma which
attracted the world's scorn and bitterness, and became a type of something to be sorrowed over
and looked upon with awe, yet with reverence, too. And, as Hester Brinn had no selfish ends,
nor lived in any measure for her own profit and enjoyment, people brought all their sorrows and
complexities, and besought her counsel as one who had herself gone through a mighty trouble,
women more especially, in the continually recurring trials of wounded, wasted, wronged,
misplaced, or erring in sinful passion, or with the dreary burden of a heart unyielded. Because
unvalued and unsought came to Hester's cottage, demanding why they were so wretched, and what
the remedy. Hester comforted and counseled them as best she might. She assured them, too, of a
firm belief that at some brighter period, when the world should have grown ripe for it in heaven's
own time, a new truth would be revealed in order to establish the whole relation between man and
woman on a surer ground of mutual happiness. Earlier in life, Hester had vainly imagined
that she herself might be the destined prophetess, but had long since recognized the
impossibility that any mission of divine and mysterious truth should be confided to a woman
stained with sin, bowed down with shame, or even burdened with a lifelong sorrow. The angel and
apostle of the coming revelation must be a woman, indeed, but lofty, pure, and beautiful, and wise.
Moreover, not through dusky grief, but the ethereal medium of joy and showing how sacred
love should make us happy by the truest test of a life successful to such an end. So said Hester
Brin, and glanced her sad eyes downward at the scarlet letter, and after many, many years,
a new grave was delved near an old and sunken one in that burial ground beside which King's chapel
has since been built. It was near that old and sunken grave, yet with a space between, as if the
dust of the two sleepers had no right to mingle, yet one tombstone served for both. All around,
there were monuments carved with ormorial bearings, and on this simple slab of slate,
as the curious investigator may still discern, and perplex himself with the porport, there appeared
the semblance of an engraved escutcheon. It bore a device, a herald's wording, of which may serve
for a motto and brief description of our now concluded legend. So sombre is it, and relieved
only by one ever-glowing point of light, gloomier than the shadow on a field, sable. The letter A,
Gules. End of chapter twenty-four. Recording by Gemma Blythe. End of the scarlet letter
by Nathaniel Orthorn.